From: prl@aps.org				 Sep 29, 2015

Re:  LG15919E
    Neighborhoods of periodic orbits and the stationary distribution of a
    noisy chaotic system
    by Jeffrey M. Heninger, Domenico Lippolis, and Predrag Cvitanovi\'c


----------------------------------------------------------------------
Report of the First Referee -- LG15919E/Heninger
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The reviewed paper proceeds the development of the method of
partitioning the state space of systems with noise, that is suitable
for recovering the invariant distribution on the attractor. The idea
is based on a local Gaussian approximation of an unknown distribution
near periodic orbits embedded into the attractor. Using the developed
approach one can compute the (co)variances of these approximations and
recover the distribution as the decomposition over these local
Gaussian curves.

My opinion is that the paper as a whole is good and can be accepted
for publication. I guess, however, it is important to make some
changes to the text according to the list below.

1. The impact of the paper could be stated more clearly. I mean what
problems can be addressed and solved using the suggested method? Some
discussions of this is present, but it takes time to locate it.

2. What is the profit of the suggested partitioning method compared
with others? I am sure that a reader not engaged deeply into this
particular topic can have questions, like the following. What if one
just cover the attractor with identical small balls? Or maybe it is
better not to spend time computing the Gaussian approximations (I
suspect that these computations will be not so fast), but just take
arbitrary boxes near periodic points and fit them together? At least a
couple of words and/or references answering these and similar naive
questions are very welcome.

3. The authors implicitly assume that the invariant distribution of a
system with noise can be represented as a decomposition over Gaussian
curves. Is it really the case? Do Gaussian curves form an appropriate
basis? Some proving discussion or references are required.

4. I suggest to be more introductive explaining the core of the
method.

======================================================================
